Idea: FirstStep – Onboarding & Gas Sponsorship SDK for Solana dApps
One‑liner
FirstStep is a plug‑and‑play SDK that gives any Solana dApp: guest mode, embedded wallets, sponsored first transactions, and a funnel dashboard to fix user drop‑off — all open source.

The pain point (real and big)
Around 70% of new users drop off at the “Connect Wallet” step before they see any value in a web3 app.

The next biggest churn reason is “why do I need to buy tokens just to try this free app?” — gas fees are confusing and feel unfair.

Teams end up re‑implementing the same fixes (guest mode, social login wallets, gas sponsorship) over and over, with no shared best‑practice or analytics.

On Solana specifically, fees are cheap, but UX is still the main blocker, not raw chain performance.

FirstStep directly attacks this: remove friction + show devs exactly where users are dropping and why.

What FirstStep does
For users (inside any dApp)
Lets them browse and use a limited version of the app without connecting a wallet (“guest mode”).

When they finally need on‑chain actions, it gives them an embedded wallet via email/Google instead of dropping a seed phrase on them.

Sponsors their first 3–5 transactions so they don’t have to buy SOL just to try something once.

For developers (your core user)
A JS/TS SDK they drop into their app:
firststep.init({ appId, sponsorPolicy })

A metrics dashboard showing funnel steps and drop‑off:

Landing → Feature Click → “Do something” → Wallet connect → Tx sign → Success

Recommendations: “70% of users quit at wallet connect, enable guest mode here” or “most failures are ‘insufficient SOL’, sponsor first tx”.

Why this is a good hackathon project (medium complexity, not insane)
You can scope it to:

SDK + demo dApp

React hook: useFirstStep()

Enable guest mode + simple embedded wallet stand‑in (e.g., custodial devnet key per session).

Simple sponsorship contract

On Solana devnet: track which wallet IDs used free transactions; prevent abuse.

Policy: max N sponsored txs per user / per app.

Analytics dashboard

Next.js app with charts for:

Number of new users

Drop‑off at each step

Sponsored tx count and cost

Opinionated UX presets

Ready‑made components:

“Start as Guest” button

“Upgrade to Full Wallet” modal

“Gas Sponsored” badge with plain‑language tooltip

This is all well within a hackathon for one strong builder using AI as support.

Why it’s useful and different
Instead of “yet another dApp,” it’s developer infrastructure that every Solana product needs if they care about non‑crypto users.

Unlike generic embedded wallet providers, FirstStep is Solana‑native and analytics‑first: its main value is showing exactly where onboarding breaks, plus giving prebuilt UX to fix it.

It leverages things we already know work: guest mode, social login wallets, gas sponsorship, all called out in 2025–2026 UX research as best practice.